---
layout: post
title: The All-Stock Arm Wrestling Championship
---

* Who's the strongest?  Let's have an arm-wrestling contest to find out
    * All of our contestants have a STR stat, generated by rolling 3d6.
    * This gives us 16 possible strength scores (3-18), representing the full range of human ability.
    * Let's meet our contestants!

* In the first corner, this pitiful little Goblin!
    * He rolled all 1s on his 3d6 strength roll
    * He's as weak as the weakest 6.25% of humans
    * There's no way he's gonna win this thing.

* In the next corner, this mighty Ogre!
    * She rolled all 6s on her 3d6 strength roll
    * She's as strong as the strongest 6.25% of humans
    * She's a lock to win this.

* So, how do we determine who's strongest?
    * We could just compare strength scores directly, but then the Ogre ALWAYS wins.
    * Surely there's some set of circumstances, however unlikely, where the Goblin wins?
    * So, let's roll dice to determine if this unlikely event happens.  we'll have each contestant roll a D20.
    * Our Goblin rolled a **13**, and our Ogre rolled **9**.  How do we incorporate our STR stat?

* Ability Score Modifier
    * In modern D&D (5e/4e/Pathfinder), we incorporate our STR score by calculating an **ability modifier**, adding them to our roll, and the higher roll wins.
    * Calculate with `Modifier = FLOOR( (stat - 10) / 2 )`, i.e. "Difference from 10, divided by 2, rounded down"
    * Make a STR check by rolling a d20 and adding your modifier, then roll above a target number.

* Opposed Modifier Rolls
    * For opposed rolls with ability modifiers, whoever rolls highest wins - it's a "roll-high" system.
    * So, our Goblin has a modifier of -4, and our Ogre has a modifier of +4.
    * So, our final rolls: Goblin rolls **9**, and Ogre rolls **17** - the Ogre wins!

* So what are the odds?
    * It turns out, our [Ogre will roll above the Goblin ~80% of the time](https://anydice.com/program/1f8b3) (thanks AnyDice!)
    * But our Ogre is an absolute beefcake, and the Goblin is absolutely puny.  How can we shift these odds?
    * Well, what if we don't divide our modifier by 2?  That puts our Goblin at -7, and our Ogre at +8.
    * Now, our [Ogre beats the Goblin ~96% of the time](https://anydice.com/program/1f8b6).
    * The Goblin still has a chance, but it's _extremely_ unlikely.  Sounds about right, at least in our absurd example.

* Pros and Cons of Ability Modifiers
    * Pro: rolling "higher is better" is quite intuitive
    * Con: need to track two different numbers on our character sheet
    * Con: loss of granularity - 10 vs. 13 Strength is the same mechanically as 11 vs. 12 Strength

* Can we roll against our stats directly?
    * Today's "Old School Revival" D&D is largely based on **Dungeons & Dragons Basic Set** (released in 1981) which uses "roll-under" ability checks.
    * Simply roll your stat or lower on a d20 to succeed a check.
    * Roll-under has its shortcomings, but suffers from none of the issues that affect modifiers.
    * It's granular, intuitive, and requires no math, plus fits nicely with a 3-18 stat scale.

* Can we use roll-under for opposed checks?
    * If the Goblin and Ogre both roll STR checks, [there's a ~76% chance the Ogre passes and the Goblin does not](https://anydice.com/program/1f8c0).
    * This is pretty comparable to our ability score modifier likelihood of 80%.
    * In our example above, the Goblin's roll of **13** fails and the Ogre's roll of **9** succeeds.
    * But what if they both pass, or both fail?  If our Ogre and Goblin both rolls a **1**, who wins?

* We could introduce a tiebreaker.
    * Say, compare STR scores whenever both contestants pass.
    * But this chance of tiebreakers increases as the skill spread narrows.
    * [A 17 STR and 18 STR Ogre will tie 78% of the time](https://anydice.com/program/1f8c1).
    * We'd expect these odds to be near 50/50, but instead become more like 92/8.  Not great.

* Roll-high-under
    * There's another d20 mechanic we can use here called "roll-high-under", used in [the popular OSR game Whitehack](https://whitehackrpg.wordpress.com/).
    * I describe this to players as the "Price Is Right" roll - roll your stat or under, the higher the better.
    * Now, we can resolve our arm wrestling check with a single roll from each contestant, without math.
    * As above, the Goblin's roll of **13** fails and the Ogre's roll of **9** succeeds.
    * In this scenario, [our Goblin now only wins ~9% of the time](https://anydice.com/program/1f8c5).

* Problems with roll-high-under
    * Pretty handy, huh!  Roll-high-under has a couple other perks as well (see Whitehack's slick handling of Armor Class), but it's not without its fault.
    * For example, what happens if both contestants fail their rolls?  We might say the contestants are locked in struggle and reroll.
    * But imagine two STR 3 Goblins - [they'll both fail their STR check 72% of the time](https://anydice.com/program/1f8c7), and so might require several rerolls.

* But there's another, more practical problem with roll-high-under systems - they can be unintuitive for players at the table.
    * For example, how do we handle a critical successes and fumbles?  In a roll-high system, rolling 20 is best and 1 is worst.
    * For roll-under systems, this is reversed - less popular today, but still immediately recognizable the moment the die finishes rolling.
    * For roll-high-under systems, a critical success is *rolling your stat exactly*.
    * This might be recognizable to the player who rolled it, but means a delayed reaction at best for the rest of the table.

* But then, some heroes walk into the bar..
    * Not just any heroes either, but the Player Characters sitting around our game table.
    * Our Goblin and Ogre must be non-player-characters, then, with their fate in the hands of the GM.
    * Does this change our scenario?  Should the GM being rolling dice to determine the outcome of the Goblin and Ogre's arm-wrestling match?

* Consider the case where the Goblin wins.
    * Granted, it's unlikely, but entirely possible.  So the GM explains: the Goblin and Ogre compete, and the Goblin emerges victorious.
    * Inevitably, the players look towards the GM - what?  How?  The Ogre is a beefcake, the Goblin is tiny - what just happened?
   
* The fiction matters.  Think quick.
    * Maybe the Goblin had an incredible breakfast that morning.  Maybe the Goblin spotted his long-lost father in the crowd.  Maybe the Goblin's favorite song came on the jukebox.
    * Maybe the Ogre had bad sushi for lunch.  Maybe the Ogre just remembered she left her front door unlocked.  Maybe the Ogre is on a ten-match losing streak and has a terrible case of The Yips.

* Now the players are intrigued.
    * If your table is anything like mine, players now want to know _why_ this happened, or at least, how they can use it to their advantage.
    * Like it or not, the in-game fiction has shifted, and potentially the players' motivations with it.
    * And who can blame them.  Clearly, this upset happened for a reason, and they'd be remiss not to investigate.

* But it _could_ become more than that.
    * The Goblin-Ogre Upset could derail the whole session, as it provides lots of hooks for players investigate.
    * Maybe they attend the Goblin celebration.  Maybe they console the dejected Ogre.  Maybe they hassle their bookie for better odds next time.
    * This one random quirk of the dice has now become *canon* in-game.

* Mostly, this is fine.
    * Just a fun bit of color, mostly.  But as GM, did we _need_ the dice here?
    * If we WANTED the upset as a plot hook (and had prepped some ideas to develop it), why would we leave this up to a 1-in-10 dice roll?
    * Conversely, if we had every expectation the Ogre would win, why would we bother rolling?
    * As GM, we can just declare the winner, however best serves the fiction of the game.

* Then our heroes decide to enter the contest.
    * Up first, a perfectly average Human Player Character!
    * They rolled a STR of 10, absolutely middle of the road.
    * We can't just declare a winner here - our Player will absolutely expect to roll some dice to determine their fate.

* So, what are our options?
    * Of course, we could do a simple opposed roll, as discussed above, with the GM rolling on behalf of the Player's opponent.
    * If we're playing Modern D&D, our human player gets an entirely average +0 modifier to add to their roll.
    * Against the Ogre, [our player has a 30% chance of winning](https://anydice.com/program/1f8cf), and [a 66% chance of winning against the Goblin](https://anydice.com/program/1f8d0).
    * These.. seem a little high.  We'd expect even our average Human Player to beat the Goblin, at least more than two-thirds of the time.

* What if we're playing a roll-high-under system like Whitehack?
    * 
